---
layout: post
date: 2010-10-25 19:02:00 UTC
title: Times
---

One weird thing about success is that it's really only the success part that is visible; whatever lead that to that success is rarely visible and even if it is, it's simply not as exciting.

I recently watched this video; it's the Mad Men's intro music with lyrics from Nature Boy. It's really lovely and as a fan of the show, it's very enjoyable for me. And fascinatingly, it's all shot in one take.

<iframe width="640" height="360" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/OEj0z0maxzM" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Well, arguable. It is one take but instead it is [take 29 of that day](http://mentalfloss.com/article/26327/mad-men-theme-nat-king-coles-nature-boy-beautiful-jazz), apparently. You could very well argue that it took them 28 takes (and quite a bit of luck) to get that one take so perfect.

So that's the thing, good stuff rarely just happens; you just have to work your way through all the shitty parts until you get it. Of course, there's a fine balance between "shipping it" and "getting it right"[1]. However, the point I am trying to make it is that whichever methodology you go by, the first few iterations is probably going to suck.

This also kind of illustrates how as a culture, of which I am of course a part of, we really value fancy, shiny things more than the work that goes into it. Maybe I am extrapolating here too liberally but every time someone complains about a "small bug" on their favorite website or a "stupid issue", a little part of me dies on the inside. But then, from a user's perspective, that is what it is. When you are trying to deliver an experience, each bug is something that takes away part of the magic.

It's a hard life.

1: In fact, I'd argue that in the world of web applications, it's probably the biggest dilemma people face.
