---
layout: post
date: 2013-01-06 21:00:00 UTC
title: Less
---

<div class="outro">
  <p>
    A small piece of writing, part of a writing challenge. Enjoy. 
  </p>
</div>

Aside from the fact I loved her, there was nothing to our relationship, which is how I prefer to call it for reasons that I'll explain later. By the time she let me in her life, lower her guards and open up to me, my role was long established, never to be changed.

Camus once said "I know of only one duty and that is to love". Devoted as he may sound, however, it was no one other than Albert Camus himself who drove his later wife to borderline mental breakdown with this constant womanizing. Experiencing a bad break-up once, the French writer grew cynical of fairer sex, essentially turned into a Don Juan himself, to much dismay of his wife.

For all I cared, though, as long as I was able to spend some good time with her, I was on the right path because I loved her and that's all that mattered. Good things happened to those who persevered in times of great hardship. 

How wrong and naive I was dawned on me when I was least expecting it, which might have something to do with it actually dawning on me. I was doing the dishes, with some cheesy Turkish pop music playing in the background. Just as I more squirted some more dish soap on my sponge, --the erotic imagery non-withstanding-- I realized it was just me who wasn't in a relationship. Killing me softly, indeed.

Love has this tendency to blind you to the objective truth, it turns out. Many, maybe including Albert Camus himself, probably believe that is what makes love so utterly magical. Not being held down by what the eye sees but being free to experience what the heart feels; doesn't that just sound wonderful? On the flip side of the coin lies, of course, the cold, objective yet unavoidable truth that we all wish to avoid.

Probably because I was actually not thinking about her or thinking about thinking about her, it occurred to me that as long as I gave her all she wanted, there was nothing she needed to do. Quite satisfied with the arrangement that we didn't know we had, she, in a truly benevolent way, got what she wanted, gave me enough to hope and lust for more and there it was: a one-way relationship.

Romantic affairs, as I have heard them called by those who must have ever been in one to be calling them that but yet seem to somehow have professional qualifications, have never been my forte. Sexual tension, or maybe perpetual sexual tension even, is how I would describe my love life overall. Time after time, I found myself flailing, shortly followed by failing whenever I wanted to be with someone and this example seemed to be following the same pattern pretty closely.

Unsure what to do next, maybe in a futile attempt to bring some closure at least one damn thing in my life, I finished the dishes, washed my sad little sponge of that (un)fortunate soap scum. Vapors from all the hot water that I used was still in the air, clouding the kitchen but clarity has been long achieved by then. 

When my phone rang just a couple minutes later, I already knew it was her, without looking at the screen. X-ray into the future, when I needed it the least.

"You don't deserve me" was all that came out when I tried to speak. Zero minutes and six awful, revolting, heart-wrenching seconds.